Update "iframe with interactive elements is not excluded from tab-order" rule to manage inert iframe elements (#2038)
act-rules/act-rules.github.io: _rules/iframe-not-focusable-has-no-interactive-content-akn7bn.md

## Applicability

This rule applies to any `iframe` element that is not [inert](#akn7bn:inert) and that [contains](#akn7bn:contain) at least one element for which all the following are true:

- the element is [visible][]; and
- the element is part of the [sequential focus navigation order][] of the `iframe`'s [document][].

An element is <dfn id="akn7bn:contain">contained</dfn> in a [nested browsing context][] if its [owner document][] is the [container document][] of the [nested browsing context][].

> An `iframe` element is <dfn id="akn7bn:inert">inert</dfn> if:

Reviewer: I think we can have this as a definition also, to make it reusable in other (future?) rules

Reviewer: And probably it would be better to have a definite of inert element, not just inert iframe

Reviewer 2: I agree, we should have a separate definition of "inert element".

> - it has an `inert` [attribute value][] of true; or

Reviewer 3: The attribute value doesn't matter. It just has to be present. Plus this should apply to ancestors too. Inert disables the entire subtree.

Reviewer 2: > The attribute value doesn't matter. It just has to be present. 

As per [our definition of attribute value](https://github.com/act-rules/act-rules.github.io/blob/develop/pages/glossary/attribute-value.md), boolean attribute (like `inert`) have an "attribute value" of `true` if the attribute is present.

> - it has an `inert` [attribute value][] of true; or

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- it has an `inert` [attribute value][] of true; or
- one of its ancestor elements has an `inert` [attribute value][] of true; or
```

> - an element which is not the iframe itself and that is not [contained](#akn7bn:contain) in it behaves as a [modal][], making the iframe inoperable.

Reviewer: What does "behaves as a modal" mean?
And do we want to tie this to the behaviour or the state? If there is a modal open, the iframe is inert and not applicable, but if the modal is closed, then the iframe is applicable. In both states, the component behaves as a modal, right?

Reviewer 2: See https://html.spec.whatwg.org/multipage/interaction.html#modal-dialogs-and-inert-subtrees

Reviewer 2: I think we can probably refer directly to the [HTML definition of inert](https://html.spec.whatwg.org/multipage/interaction.html#inert).
It doesn't refer explicitly to modals, but [being blocked by a modal](https://html.spec.whatwg.org/multipage/interaction.html#blocked-by-a-modal-dialog) causes most of the document to be inert, so we can mention that.

If we want to have our own definition of inert, we should probably refer to "being blocked by a modal", since it is objective and unambiguous, and a common definition from higher spec.
This may leave room for custom modals where somebody uses a `div` and a ton of Javascript to turn it into a modal manually. We might be OK enough by having an assumption about people not being that crazy… (i.e. I do not know how frequent it is for devs to re-code modal behaviour on their own rather than relying on native semantics…)

> - an element which is not the iframe itself and that is not [contained](#akn7bn:contain) in it behaves as a [modal][], making the iframe inoperable.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- an element which is not the iframe itself and that is not [contained](#akn7bn:contain) in it makes the iframe and all of its contents [inoperable][].  (For example: a modal.)
```
Does that improve the situation at all?

Reviewer 3: What I meant by modal dialogs was the actual `<dialog>` element with `showModal()` called on it. That programmatically makes all other content on the page inert. I think you could define it like this:

> The element is in a page with a `dialog` element with the [`is-modal`](https://html.spec.whatwg.org/multipage/interactive-elements.html#is-modal) flag set to `true`, and is not a descendant of that `dialog` element.

I'm not sure we should try for a generic modal definition. I don't know how you'd do that in a way that's objective.

Reviewer 2: Then, we are indeed going for [blocked by a modal](https://html.spec.whatwg.org/multipage/interaction.html#blocked-by-a-modal-dialog):
> A [Document](https://html.spec.whatwg.org/multipage/dom.html#document) document is blocked by a modal dialog subject if subject is the topmost [dialog](https://html.spec.whatwg.org/multipage/interactive-elements.html#the-dialog-element) element in document's [top layer](https://fullscreen.spec.whatwg.org/#top-layer). While document is so blocked, every node that is [connected](https://dom.spec.whatwg.org/#connected) to document, with the exception of the subject element and its [flat tree](https://drafts.csswg.org/css-scoping/#flat-tree) descendants, must become [inert](https://html.spec.whatwg.org/multipage/interaction.html#inert).

> subject can additionally become [inert](https://html.spec.whatwg.org/multipage/interaction.html#inert) via the [inert](https://html.spec.whatwg.org/multipage/interaction.html#the-inert-attribute) attribute, but only if specified on subject itself (i.e., subject escapes inertness of ancestors); subject's [flat tree](https://drafts.csswg.org/css-scoping/#flat-tree) descendants can become [inert](https://html.spec.whatwg.org/multipage/interaction.html#inert) in a similar fashion.

> Note: The [dialog](https://html.spec.whatwg.org/multipage/interactive-elements.html#the-dialog-element) element's [showModal()](https://html.spec.whatwg.org/multipage/interactive-elements.html#dom-dialog-showmodal) method causes this mechanism to trigger, by [adding](https://fullscreen.spec.whatwg.org/#top-layer-add) the [dialog](https://html.spec.whatwg.org/multipage/interactive-elements.html#the-dialog-element) element to its [node document](https://dom.spec.whatwg.org/#concept-node-document)'s [top layer](https://fullscreen.spec.whatwg.org/#top-layer).

> - an element which is not the iframe itself and that is not [contained](#akn7bn:contain) in it behaves as a [modal][], making the iframe inoperable.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- it is on the same page as a `dialog` element which has its [`is-modal`](https://html.spec.whatwg.org/multipage/interactive-elements.html#is-modal) flag set to `true`, and is not a descendant of that `dialog` element.
```

<iframe tabindex="-1" srcdoc="<a href='/' tabindex='-1'>Home</a>"></iframe>
```

#### Inapplicable Example 5

This `iframe` element is [inert][] because of its own `inert` [attribute value][].

```html
<iframe tabindex="-1" inert srcdoc="<a href='/'>Home</a>"></iframe>
```

#### Inapplicable Example 6

Once the "Privacy policy details" button is activated, the `iframe` element becomes [inert][] because of the showModal() method, which causes the `iframe` to be [blocked by a modal].

```html

> <iframe tabindex="-1" srcdoc="<a href='/'>Home</a>"></iframe>
> <div>
>     <button id="ppDetails">Privacy policy details</button>
> </div>
> <dialog id="ppDialog" aria-labelledby="dialogLabel">
>     <h2 id="dialogLabel">Privacy Policy</h2>
>     <p>Lorem ipsum dolor sit amet, consectetur adipiscing elit, sed do eiusmod tempor incididunt ut labore et dolore magna aliqua. Ut enim ad minim veniam, quis nostrud exercitation ullamco laboris nisi ut aliquip ex ea commodo consequat. Duis aute irure dolor in reprehenderit in voluptate velit esse cillum dolore eu fugiat nulla pariatur. Excepteur sint occaecat cupidatat non proident, sunt in culpa qui officia deserunt mollit anim id est laborum.</p>
>     <button id="cancel">Cancel</button>
> </dialog>
> <script>    
> 			const dialog = document.getElementById("ppDialog");
> 			window.addEventListener('load', function(event) {
>     			dialog.showModal();
> 			});
> </script>

Reviewer 3: I'm not entirely happy with this example. You can easily get this in an inaccessible state. Before onload the page is inaccessible, and after the modal is closed too. I also think that using "DOMContentLoaded" would be better, since most tools start testing when onload is triggered. This ensures the modal is already open when automated testing starts. I also added a title attribute to the iframe, and removed the duplicate ID. Lastly, I adjusted whitespace so it's what our formatter expects.

```suggestion
<iframe id="myFrame" title="Links" srcdoc="<a href='/'>Home</a>"></iframe>
<div>
	<button id="ppButton" onclick="openDialog()">Privacy policy details</button>
</div>
<dialog id="ppDialog" aria-labelledby="dialogLabel">
	<h2 id="dialogLabel">Privacy Policy</h2>
	<p>We store no data.</p>
	<button id="cancel" onclick="ppDialog.close()">Cancel</button>
</dialog>
<script>
	const openDialog = () => {
		ppDialog.showModal();
		myFrame.tabIndex = '-1'
	}
	ppDialog.addEventListener('close', () => myFrame.tabIndex = 0)
	window.addEventListener('DOMContentLoaded', openDialog);
</script>
```

<iframe tabindex="-1" srcdoc="<a href='/' tabindex='-1'>Home</a>"></iframe>
```

#### Inapplicable Example 5

This `iframe` element is [inert][] because of its own `inert` [attribute value][].

```html

> <iframe inert srcdoc="<a href='/'>Home</a>"></iframe>

Reviewer 2: I think the `iframe` shuld have a negative `tabindex` under the rule of thumb "the Inapplicable example should look bad if it wasn't inapplicable". The reason is that in implemetation reports "Passed" and "Inapplicable" results are essentially equivalent, so to detect wrong Applicability in a tool, we need the tool to (wrongly) report "Failed" rather than to wrongly report "Passed".
```suggestion
<iframe tabindex="-1" inert srcdoc="<a href='/'>Home</a>"></iframe>
```

```

#### Inapplicable Example 6

> Once "Privacy policy details" button is activated, the `iframe` element become [inert][] because of showModal() method that causes the `iframe` to be [blocked by a modal].

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Once the "Privacy policy details" button is activated, the `iframe` element becomes [inert][] because of the showModal() method, which causes the `iframe` to be [blocked by a modal].
```

> Once "Privacy policy details" button is activated, the `iframe` element become [inert][] because of showModal() method that causes the `iframe` to be [blocked by a modal].

Reviewer 2: I think we should make the example so that the modal is shown at load time.
Currently, examples do not require manipulation before testing. There are some steps in that direction as part of the "states" discussion (#1953, #2045).

In this case, we can simply call the `showModal` in an `onload` call to ensure this is testable out of the box. I think the example will still look "real" enough that people will understand why the modal is opened by default. (otherwise a more realstic case could be to have a cookies banner or region selection modal that is opened on page load and blocking interaction with the rest of the page).

```html

> <iframe srcdoc="<a href='/'>Home</a>"></iframe>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
<iframe tabindex="-1" srcdoc="<a href='/'>Home</a>"></iframe>
```

<div>
    <button id="ppDetails">Privacy policy details</button>
</div>
<dialog id="ppDialog" aria-labelledby="dialogLabel">
    <h2 id="dialogLabel">Privacy Policy</h2>
    <p>Lorem ipsum dolor sit amet, consectetur adipiscing elit, sed do eiusmod tempor incididunt ut labore et dolore magna aliqua. Ut enim ad minim veniam, quis nostrud exercitation ullamco laboris nisi ut aliquip ex ea commodo consequat. Duis aute irure dolor in reprehenderit in voluptate velit esse cillum dolore eu fugiat nulla pariatur. Excepteur sint occaecat cupidatat non proident, sunt in culpa qui officia deserunt mollit anim id est laborum.</p>
    <button id="cancel">Cancel</button>
</dialog>
<script>
    const ppDetails = document.getElementById("ppDetails");
    const cancelButton = document.getElementById("cancel");
    const dialog = document.getElementById("ppDialog");

    ppDetails.addEventListener("click", () => {
        dialog.showModal();
    });

    cancelButton.addEventListener("click", () => {
        dialog.close();
    });
</script>
```

#### Inapplicable Example 7

> This `iframe` element is [inert][] because it is [blocked by a modal].

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This `iframe` element is [inert][] because it is [blocked by a modal][].
```
This will also need an entry in the references list.

> This `iframe` element is [inert][] because it is [blocked by a modal].

Reviewer 2: It's technically not true. The HTML definition of "blocked by a modal" requires a `dialog` element to do the blocking, while this is done by a `div`.

Also, this actually doesn't works. Due to non-interference with the host language, `aria-modal` does not make the rest of the page inert. [ARIA for `aria-modal`](https://www.w3.org/TR/wai-aria-1.2/#aria-modal) states:
> When a modal element is displayed, authors SHOULD mark all other contents as inert (such as "inert subtrees" in HTML)

When testing (without the negative `tabindex`), I have no problem tabbing onto the link inside the `iframe`. I haven't tested whether screen reader consider it as inert, but Chrome doesn't.

```html
<div style="width:100vw; height:100vh; position:absolute; left:0; top:0; background:#000; opacity: 0.8;"></div>
<div role="dialog" aria-labelledby="modal-heading" aria-modal="true" tabindex="-1" style="width:calc(100% - 20vw); height:calc(100% - 20vh); margin-left:10vw; margin-top:10vh; position:absolute; left:0; top:0; background:#fff; z-index:1; padding:40px; box-sizing:border-box;">
  <h2 id="modal-heading">Hello</h2>
  <p>Hello World!</p>
</div>
<iframe tabindex="-1" srcdoc="<a href='/'>Home</a>"></iframe>
```

> 
> [attribute value]: #attribute-value 'Definition of Attribute Value'

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

[attribute value]: #attribute-value 'Definition of Attribute Value'
[blocked by a modal]: https://html.spec.whatwg.org/multipage/interaction.html#blocked-by-a-modal-dialog
```

```

#### Inapplicable Example 5

This `iframe` element is [inert][] because of its own `inert` [attribute value][].

```html
<iframe inert srcdoc="<a href='/'>Home</a>"></iframe>
```

#### Inapplicable Example 6

This `iframe` element is [inert][] because of another element that behaves as a [modal][].

```html
<div style="width:100vw; height:100vh; position:absolute; left:0; top:0; background:#000; opacity: 0.8;"></div>
<div role="dialog" aria-labelledby="modal-heading" aria-modal="true" tabindex="-1" style="width:calc(100% - 20vw); height:calc(100% - 20vh); margin-left:10vw; margin-top:10vh; position:absolute; left:0; top:0; background:#fff; z-index:1; padding:40px; box-sizing:border-box;">
  <h2 id="modal-heading">Hello</h2>
  <p>Hello World!</p>
</div>
<iframe tabindex="-1" srcdoc="<a href='/'>Home</a>"></iframe>
```

[attribute value]: #attribute-value 'Definition of Attribute Value'
[container document]: https://html.spec.whatwg.org/#bc-container-document 'HTML browsing context container document, 2020/12/18'
[document]: https://html.spec.whatwg.org/multipage/dom.html#document 'HTML definition of document'

> [flattened tabindex-ordered focus navigation scope]: https://html.spec.whatwg.org/multipage/interaction.html#flattened-tabindex-ordered-focus-navigation-scope 'HTML - Living Standard, 2022/07/08'

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
[flattened tabindex-ordered focus navigation scope]: https://html.spec.whatwg.org/multipage/interaction.html#flattened-tabindex-ordered-focus-navigation-scope 'HTML - Living Standard, 2022/07/08'
[inoperable]: https://www.w3.org/TR/wai-aria/#dfn-operable
```

Reviewer 3: This looks outdated?
